---
layout: post_note
title: "A purely epistemic objective of life"
date: 2024-05-15 22:20:32 +0900
source: note
source_url: "https://note.com/rmaruy/n/n056b67712667"
tags:
  - AI
  - 哲学
---

I am writing this primarily to my future self.

I've been thinking to myself lately: how can I quantify the success of my daily activities? Each mode of life seems to have its own metrics. If you are an academic researcher, you need to keep up with your publications. If you are a bureaucrat, how far you go up the organizational hierarchy may be viewed as one measure of success. Of course, these are proxies for some "real" objective of a career, but they can guide day-to-day activities.

As for myself, it's difficult to measure success. My life seems to be a failure if measured by any existing metrics.

But I don't think I'm particularly lazy. So, what have I really been pursuing? I can think of a proxy. Let me call it the "purely epistemic objective" (PEO) of life. To pursue the PEO is to "maximize understanding about the world in one's lifetime." The PEO is agnostic about the source of that understanding: you can have zero contribution to it. The PEO is not about maximizing "knowledge"; it is about "understanding." Gaining a bit of knowledge in one's familiar field does not contribute much to the PEO, but being exposed to a totally new field and acquiring a new viewpoint does.

You don't have to discover or invent anything. Just reading a great book or article directly contributes to the PEO. This may sound like a vastly selfish attitude. Actually, it is. You only receive and don't give back intellectually.

But when you become really greedy in pursuing the PEO, you become dissatisfied with merely consuming intellectual outputs. You want to actively enhance the production of intellectual outputs that will contribute to your understanding of the world. This may be through doing research yourself or by catalyzing research through funding, community building, and other means. Such research ecosystem sustaining endeavors emerge as instrumental subgoals in pursuing the PEO.

Of course you can't, and don't, live with the PEO alone. No one will reward you for pursuing the PEO. That's why I said it is a proxy measure of a successful life. But it's good to be aware that I value PEO. I have a feeling that acting "as if" I pursue PEO and all the other metrics are only instrumental goals will help me focus on something I really want to spend my time on.